---
title: 'General Exam Part 1: ML Prerequisite Review'
date: 2024-03-22
permalink: /posts/2024-10-30/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - General_Exam
mathjax: true
---

Now that I'm a couple of months out from passing my general exam in April (with highest marks!), I figured it was a good time to reflect back on my experiences as I can now look back objectively and without influence from those emotional highs. This may read quite stream-of-consciousness-like (sounds like a great paper title lol) and messy, but this isn't an academic paper so that's okay.

Preparation
======

As is common across many PhD programs, enrolled students typically need to take what's called a comprehensive exam, a general exam, or a qualifying exam - different names, but they all mean broadly the same thing. It's there to test your background knowledge, make sure you have the skillset to pursue the PhD degree, and to evaluate the research you've done so far. Typically PhD students take this exam sometime around the end of their first or second year, where passing the exam usually allows them to transition from PhD student to candidate (a semantic distinction, but it can feel like an important one!). Additionally, this is the point where universities will typically award a master's degree along the way upon passing the exam, so it's a big milestone in the journey.

I should start by saying that before my 4th semester (when ECE PhD students at Princeton are slated to schedule their general exam), I hadn't really given this too much thought, as I was extremely busy conducting research, writing papers, and satisfying the (somewhat heavy) course requirements (we have to take 8 courses before our general exam, but 6 of them have to be taken in the first year alone). In the Fall semester, I actually decided not to take any courses, as most of the offered courses weren't relevant and I figured I could just move my requirements to Spring semester, aka the semester when I take my general exam. In hindsight, this was probably not a smart move, as it increased my workload during this time, but hindsight is always 20/20. 

For our department, the general exam consists of 2 portions, up to 90 min. each: a research presentation and an oral exam. In the research presentation, you present what you've done so far in terms of research work, and you get critiqued by your committee. You can also choose to delve a little into what directions you are interested in (like I did). In the oral exam, the committee basically wants to test your general knowledge, whether it's related to your research domain, course materials, or anything they feel like asking. Given the open-endedness of this portion, this was actually scarier. I had done enough research in my first two years to talk about (an EMNLP 2023 paper, a NAACL 2024 paper), and was pretty confident since this was research I did, but I was a little worried about what kinds of questions the committee might ask in the oral exam. 

I was lucky, or fortunate, that I started contemplating this process early, even before the start of the Spring semester. I had drafted up a set of topics that I felt were relevant, either due to my research or from the courses I've taken, and gathered some preliminary study resources (e.g. textbooks, online courses, cheat sheets, etc.). Administratively, probably the most important thing to consider though is (1) who is going to be on your committee, and (2) when exactly do you want to schedule your general exam date?

(1) was something that was on my mind earliest, given my unique advising situation (my advisor is not a tenure-track faculty at Princeton, but that's a story for another time). The ECE department requires one of the committee members to be an ECE professor, and given that my research area is in NLP, that didn't leave me with many options. Knowing this, I knew I had to ask early because otherwise there's a chance there either wouldn't be any professors doing related research, or they would be committed to other students' general exam committees. I ended up asking Prof. Niraj Jha in the ECE department around late January, who did some research in general ML. Obviously my advisor would be a member on the committee, but I needed a third member. Personally, I preferred having another faculty member experienced in NLP/conducting NLP research, so I ended up reaching out to Prof. Danqi Chen in the CS department (also around late January). Thankfully, both faculty were willing to serve on my committee, so I was pretty happy to get this significant administrative detail wrapped up quite quickly (basically at the start of the semester). To be honest, I thought I might have been quite early to reach out, but personally I'd rather reach out early rather than waiting later in the semester, where I saw many people scrambling to find faculty that were free and willing to serve on their committees. At least that was one less headache out of the way!

(2) mostly comes to personal choice to be honest. I was someone that preferred scheduling the exam early (I'd rather get it done and over with rather than having to endure that agonizingly long wait). We had the option of scheduling the exam anytime from mid-April (4/15) to the end of May. Luckily, this was where forming my committee early really came in handy, as I was all set to book my room (given confirmation of the committee). I ended up scheduling my exam on April 17. I should also mention that we were given the option to schedule our research presentation and oral exam portions on separate days, if we wished. I knew some people who did, and some who didn't. I personally scheduled them on the same day, simply because I wanted to get it over with, but others probably valued that in-between time more.

The lead up to the exam was quite stressful actually - I was taking two courses, TAing for a brand new course, conducting independent research by myself with my advisor, and studying for the general exam all at the same time. To say that I was stretched to my limits was quite an understatement. To prevent myself from getting overwhelmed, I actually wrote down a detailed schedule of how to break up my studying, noting down how many days and when I would allocate these days for each topic (e.g. 5 days for NLP review from Mar. 3-8 or something like that). I made sure to try and finish my schedule roughly a week before the actual exam date, so I could give myself time to review anything extra, go over any tricky concepts again, and just to budget in some leeway. Personally, I like to prepare for things well in advance (it's how I approached studying in undergrad), as I always worried that cramming last minute might actually cause more leakage of information if anything. 

It came to a certain point though, that I realized if I tried to study everything, I would end up learning nothing, because ML and NLP is just so broad and diverse. This is where I think making that schedule and list of topics came in handy, so that I could just focus on those, and if questions on other topics arose, well unfortunately there wouldn't be much I could do then. It was quite calming actually, being okay with being unable to study for everything, but I told myself that if I focus on my strengths and just approach unknown questions by breaking them down and thinking out loud (almost like a technical interview), then I'd be okay.

General Exam
======

I was quite nervous the day of the exam, but it helped to really think through the amount of effort I had put into my studying, and make peace with the fact that given the amount of effort I put in, I trusted that the results would show.

My research presentation went well for the most part - I began by first going big picture into the problem motivation, and then deep diving into my two papers I had published thus far. I had a couple of funny slides in the beginning, which I actually think helped quite a lot - seeing a couple of the professors smile or laugh really eased my nerves and calm me down for the rest of the presentation. Overall, I thought it went quite well, and the questions they asked were definitely coming from a place of curiosity rather than judgment or skepticism. My NAACL 2024 paper in particular seemed to draw the interest of both Prof. Chen and Prof. Jha, given the counterintuitive results I had found there. I'm pretty sure they could still see how nervous I was though, as they reassurred me that I was doing great so far.

Before the oral exam, the committee asked if I wanted a 5-10 min. break before continuing. Honestly, I wanted to just get straight into it - I worried that that break would cause me to begin second-guessing myself or reflect back on my presentation, which I worried would throw me off my game. Each professor ended up asking roughly 20 min. of questions each. 

Prof. Chen went first, asking me to explain how word2vec works, then explain self-attention, and finally talk about how ChatGPT was trained (i.e. PPO algorithm). I felt pretty good about the first two topics, and mostly covered the last topic. Given my limited (actually none) experience with RL, I could only explain the high-level concepts behind ChatGPT's training procedure, but overall, I was pretty satisfied with my performance here, and it appeared that Prof. Chen was happy as well. 

Up next was Prof. Jha, who asked me to explain how GNNs work. My only exposure was through one course I had taken on graph signal processing, so there were some hiccups, but generally no issues. I briefly explain the aggregate function and described how there are parallels with RNNs (e.g. vertices far away from a particular vertex would have less information during the aggregate). Then he asked me to explain how LoRA fine-tuning works, which also went fine. Finally, he asked me a challenge question (his words) from a paper that was published roughly a month before my exam (so no chance I had read it by then). The paper was "DoRA: Weight-Decomposed Low-Rank Adaptation", which was published in ICML this year. I feel like this question was more to gauge how I thought as a researcher, as he and I both knew that I had not read the paper and so didn't know their methods. Instead, he asked me to think about what their method might be given the paper title. Specifically, he asked me to think about how the authors could have encoded rotational direction. I ended up suggesting something about polar coordinates, to which he said that that's not what they did, but I think your appproach could also work. Honestly, even though it wasn't correct, this was quite validating to hear that he thought my idea was viable. 

Finally, last up was my advisor. She first asked me to explain linear regression and write out the equations. Then she asked me to prove the solution, so I derived the closed-form solution for linear regression (the one with the pseudo-inverse). From here, she also asked me to first write out the classification loss function, and talk about where it comes from (i.e. Bernoulli random variables). Finally, there were some brief conceptual things regarding NLP, where she asked me to explain logistic regression in NLP settings (that's where the classification loss function question led to). 

At last, it was done. They told me they would take a couple of minutes to deliberate, and when I came back into the room, they broke the news that I had passed with highest marks (I believe they assign letter grades, but those aren't ever revealed, but it seems I got an A?)! Regardless, I was just glad that it was over and done with.

Takeaways
======

Honestly? I'd say the general exam is less so an exam where you are being evaluated, but treat it more like a self-evaluation. I will say that it definitely gave me more confidence during meetings, proposing research ideas, and this was confidence was huge - just passing the exam and hearing the committee say that I passed did wonders for my confidence as a researcher. Because of this, I felt it was a highly important ritual for a PhD researcher. 
